content: reorganize levels, update requirement text (#1483)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/draft/source-requirements.md

| Track/Level | Requirements | Focus
| ----------- | ------------ | -----
| [Source L1](#source-l1)  | Use a version control system. | Generation of discrete Source Revisions for precise consumption.
| [Source L2](#source-l2)  | Preserve Change History and generate Source Provenance. | Reliable history through enforced controls and evidence.

> | [Source L3](#source-l3)  | Enforce organizational intent with technical controls. | Consumer knowledge of consumable Source Revisions and their guaranteed technical controls.

Reviewer: "Enforce organizational technical controls" SGTM!

</section>
<section id="source-l2">

### Level 2: History & Provenance

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

At least one branch’s history is continuous, immutable, and retained, and the
SCS issues Source Provenance Attestations for each new Source Revision.
The attestations provide contemporaneous, tamper-resistant evidence of when
changes were made, who made them, and which technical controls were enforced.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

All organizations of any size producing software of any kind.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Reliable history allows organizations and consumers to track changes to software
over time, enabling attribution of those changes to the actors that made them.
Source Provenance provides strong, tamper-resistant evidence of the process that
was followed to produce a Source Revision.

</dl>
</section>
<section id="source-l3">

> ### Level 3: Continuous technical controls

Reviewer 2: A policy repo isn't _necessarily_ a requirement of the track, but it is an implementation detail of the source tool? I guess one benefit of this type of public visibility is that it allows consumers to reason about continuity of controls as well as the use of safe expunging process.

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

> The SCS is configured to enforce the Organization's intentions for specific Named References within the Source
> Repository using any necessary technical controls.

Author: ```suggestion
The SCS is configured to enforce the Organization's intentions for specific Named References within the Source
Repository using any necessary technical controls.
The organization declares its intention to enforce those controls continuously.
```

<dt>Intended for<dd>

> Organizations that need to show evidence of additional technical controls.

Author: @TomHennen I think it's just this now 😂

Author: or maybe "evidence of their commitment to technical controls?"

Reviewer 2: Something along the lines of "evidence of their commitment to technical controls" is more accurate as it isn't a requirement that there are any additional technical controls.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

A verifier can use this published data to ensure that a given Source Revision
was created in the correct way by verifying the Source Provenance or VSA

> for all expected claims and properties.

Author: ```suggestion
Provides verifiers strong evidence of all technical controls enforced when updating a Named Reference. Allows verification that the Source Revision is compliant with the expected policy.
```

</section>
<section id="source-l2">

### Level 2: History & Provenance

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

At least one branch’s history is continuous, immutable, and retained, and the
SCS issues Source Provenance Attestations for each new Source Revision.
The attestations provide contemporaneous, tamper-resistant evidence of when
changes were made, who made them, and which technical controls were enforced.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

All organizations of any size producing software of any kind.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Reliable history allows organizations and consumers to track changes to software
over time, enabling attribution of those changes to the actors that made them.
Source Provenance provides strong, tamper-resistant evidence of the process that
was followed to produce a Source Revision.

</dl>
</section>
<section id="source-l3">

### Level 3: Continuous technical controls

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The SCS is configured to enforce the Organization's intentions for specific Named References within the Source
Repository using any necessary technical controls.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

> Organizations with many Named References or who otherwise need to document
> which controls were enforced.

Author: ```suggestion
Organizations that need to show evidence of additional technical controls.
```

</section>
<section id="source-l2">

> ### Level 2: History & Provenance

Reviewer: The main thing is that in the discussion we've been having those additional controls are introduced at level 3.  Are you proposing changing that?

> ### Level 2: History & Provenance

Reviewer: > I can't quite imagine what tools would get you into that situation, but I fully agree with the sentiment.

Custom built ones (I assure you they exist :) )

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The SCS implements any controls necessary to enforce that the history of a branch
is continuous, authenticated, immutable, and retained.

The SCS generates credible, tamper-resistant, and contemporaneous evidence of
how a specific revision was created.
It is provided to authorized users of the source repository in a documented format.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

All organizations of any size producing software of any kind.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Reliable history allows organizations and consumers to track changes to software
over time, enabling attribution of those changes to the actors that made them.
Source Provenance provides strong, tamper-resistant evidence of the process that
was followed to produce a Source Revision.

</dl>
</section>
<section id="source-l3">

> ### Level 3: Communication of Organization Intent

Author: This section is still rough. 
I don't dislike the direction though -- "public declaration of intent to empower verifiers" is probably a good level 3

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The Organization clarifies which Named References in a repo are consumable and
defines which technical controls are guaranteed in those contexts.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

> Organizations with many Branches and Tags or who otherwise need to specify
> the expected way to consume and verify their Source Revisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Organizations with many Branches and Tags or who otherwise need to document
which controls were in place as Source Revisions were created.
```
One of the major uses of this level, IMO, is for orgs that having compliance requirements that include things that dictate how source is created.  Having those controls enforced by the SCS _and encoded in provenance and VSAs_ would make audits much easier.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

> A verifier can use this published data to ensure that a given revision was
> acquired in the correct way and to verify that the Source Provenance (or VSA)
> contains evidence of all expected claims and properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A verifier can use this published data to ensure that a given revision was
created in the correct way by examining the Source Provenance or VSA
for all expected claims and properties.
```

Author: I like your phrasing better. I did have the word "acquire" in there, because I think the verifier is supposed to check the uri? maybe we can skip that concept. 
maybe it also doesn't matter if the consumer gets the revision from the canonical location or not, as long as the provenance was signed correctly or the VSA exists?

Reviewer: Yeah, we have a whole section on how to verify the VSA.  Maybe we just change 'examining' to 'verifying'?

</section>
<section id="source-l2">

### Level 2: History & Provenance

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

> At least one branch’s history is continuous, immutable, and retained, and the

Reviewer: Sounds great.

SCS issues Source Provenance Attestations for each new Source Revision.
The attestations provide contemporaneous, tamper‑resistant evidence of when
changes were made, who made them, and which technical controls were enforced.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

All organizations of any size producing software of any kind.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Reliable history allows organizations and consumers to track changes to software
over time, enabling attribution of those changes to the actors that made them.
Source Provenance provides strong, tamper-resistant evidence of the process that
was followed to produce a Source Revision.

</dl>
</section>
<section id="source-l3">

> ### Level 3: Communication and Enforcement of Intent

Author: ```suggestion
### Level 3: Continuous technical controls
```

At level three you must state the controls you commit to enforcing in some contexts.

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

> The SCS is configured to enforce the Organization's intentions for the Source

Author: ```suggestion
The SCS is configured to enforce the Organization's intentions for specific Named References within the Source
```

> The SCS is configured to enforce the Organization's intentions for the Source
> Repository using any necessary technical controls.
> 
> The Organization clarifies which revisions and Named References in a repo are
> intended for consumption and defines which technical controls are guaranteed in
> those contexts.

Author: I kinda like this conversational tone better?

```suggestion
The organization clarifies which revisions and Named References in a repo are
intended for consumption and defines which technical controls are guaranteed in
those contexts.
This represents their "intention" for each branch of the repo.

At this Level, organizations must deploy technical controls that hold themselves
accountable to their commitments.
There must be documented evidence of all technical controls that govern the
branch, and how together they combine to ensure that each new revision is a
faithful representation of the organization's intent.
```

Author: > nit: Is there a case where revisions are allowed here?

I think the core idea is that revisions are the thing which are or aren't compliant -- refs just point to those things. 
A case I keep in mind for this is a CI/CD system on a fast branch where you might have multiple builds in flight for revisions along the same branch. It should be okay to build and deploy a revision as long as it has the right provenance regardless of whether it's on the tip of the branch or even reachable from the branch.

An extreme case of this could be a CD process which is in flight while simultaneously a "safe expungement" operation is happening which will ultimately orphan the revision.
Depending on why the expungement was happening, that commit may still be fine to consume, just the producer needs to change the history for some reason (maybe they're rotating a signing key and need to resign all the commits for example).

Reviewer 3: Oh, I now see the other thread where this is being discussed in more detail. It sounds like we're not so far off on intent, but rather about how we explain it. I agree with Tom's suggestion that it needed more explanation in the doc.

</section>
<section id="source-l2">

### Level 2: History & Provenance

<dl class="as-table">
<dt>Summary<dd>

The SCS implements any controls necessary to enforce that the _history_ of at
least one branch is continuous, authenticated, immutable, and retained.

The SCS generates credible, tamper-resistant, and contemporaneous evidence of
how each consumable revision was created, including enforced technical controls.
It is provided to authorized users of the Source Repository in a documented
format.

<dt>Intended for<dd>

All organizations of any size producing software of any kind.

<dt>Benefits<dd>

Reliable history allows organizations and consumers to track changes to software
over time, enabling attribution of those changes to the actors that made them.
Source Provenance provides strong, tamper-resistant evidence of the process that
was followed to produce a Source Revision.

</dl>
</section>
<section id="source-l3">

> ### Level 3: Communication and Enforcement of Intent

Author: If you want to claim something, you must have documented evidence of mechanically-enforced technical controls for it. You can't just promise to unit test.

We can maybe make that even more clear:

"Organizations mut take a hard look at all things they want to be true about their software. Do they want code review? SAST? Unit testing? 
Which of those things do they commit to actually doing? This represents their intention. 
At this Level, organizations must deploy technical controls that hold them accountable to their commitments. There must be documented evidence of all technical controls that govern the repo, and together, these must combine to ensure that each new revision is a faithful representation of the org's intent for the repo."

attestations.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="configure-controls"><td>Configure the SCS to enforce intent <a href="#configure-controls">🔗</a><td>

The organization MUST configure access controls that govern access to sensitive
operations on the Source Repository.
These controls MUST be implemented using the SCS-provided
[Identity Management capability](#identity-management).

> For example, an organization may configure the SCS to assign users to a
`maintainers` role and only allow users in `maintainers` to make updates to `main`.

The organization MUST configure technical controls provided by the SCS to
enforce the organization's intention for the Source Repository.
At a minimum, the SCS MUST be configured to produce a reliable
[Change History](#history) on at least one branch.

> For example, if the organization intends for all new Source Revisions on the
`main` branch to be unit tested prior to acceptance, this MUST be explicitly
configured in the SCS, not a social contract.

If the SCS supports "tags" (or other Named References that do not support
continuity enforcement mechanisms or change management processes), the SCS MUST

> be configured to prevent tags from being moved or deleted.

Reviewer: I think this could work here but I think the section could use some tweaking.

One thing that might be causing some trouble is lack of clarify around what the level applies to. As written this is somewhat ambiguous.  As long as the org has protected a single branch does all their source qualify as L2?  I think we understand that the answer is 'no', only revisions created on that branch would qualify as L2 (and there would be a VSA & prov linking the revision to that branch).  But I don't think we communicate this anywhere (should we?).

Contrast this with the current language for tags, "the SCS MUST
be configured to prevent tags from being moved or deleted" if this is using our current definition of tags (something that shouldn't move) this is a bit of a tautology.  If we're using the looser definition of tags (e.g. maybe it could move) then it just conflicts with our other definition.

What we should probably try to communicate is "if you want your users to be able to consume a revision from a named reference verified at L2+ then that named reference must either be a branch with its history protected or a tag that is prevented from being moved or deleted".

> For example, if a git tag `release1` is used to indicate a release revision
with ID `abc123`, controls must be configured to prevent that tag from being
updated to any other revision in the future.
Evidence of these controls (and their continuity) will appear in the Source
Provenance documents for revision `abc123`.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓
<tr id="safe-expunging-process"><td>Safe Expunging Process <a href="#safe-expunging-process">🔗</a><td>

SCSs MAY allow the organization to expunge (remove) content from a repository

> and its change history without leaving a public record of the removed content,

Reviewer: Seems fine to me but we should probably not use a git specific term like force pushing (should already be covered by history protection?).

Alternatively, leave it alone, if we soften this further it's an easy change that doesn't require a major change.

<table>
<tr><th>Requirement<th>Description<th>L1<th>L2<th>L3<th>L4

<tr id="choose-scs"><td>Choose an appropriate Source Control System <a href="#choose-scs">🔗</a><td>

An organization producing Source Revisions MUST select an SCS capable of reaching
their desired SLSA Source Level.

> For example, if an organization wishes to produce revisions at Source Level 3,
they MUST choose a Source Control System capable of producing Source Level 3
attestations.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="configure-controls"><td>Configure the SCS to enforce intent <a href="#configure-controls">🔗</a><td>

The organization MUST configure access controls that govern access to sensitive
operations on the Source Repository.
These controls MUST be implemented using the SCS-provided
[Identity Management capability](#identity-management).

> For example, an organization may configure the SCS to assign users to a
`maintainers` role and only allow users in `maintainers` to make updates to `main`.

The organization MUST configure technical controls provided by the SCS to
enforce the organization's intention for the Source Repository.
At a minimum, the SCS MUST be configured to produce a reliable

> [Change History](#history) on at least one branch.

Reviewer: Yes I think that works.  Still need to update the language though I think.  I generally like @MarkLodato's framing around L2 being about History and Access Control.  L3 seems much better positioned to get into 'intent'.

> [Change History](#history) on at least one branch.

Author: So, if we cut the intent line you'd be ok? That's fine I think.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

> <tr id="configure-controls"><td>Enable technical controls to enforce intent <a href="#configure-controls">🔗</a><td>

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this title it's talking about intent (L3 stuff) but then also does identity management (should be L2).

The organization MUST use the SCS provided
[Identity Management capability](#identity-management) to configure the actors
and roles that are allowed to perform sensitive actions.

> For example, an organization may configure the SCS to assign users to a
`maintainers` role and only allow users in `maintainers` to make updates to `main`.

> The organization MUST specify what technical controls consumers can expect to be

Reviewer: Here and below should be moved to L3 as it's not a history related control.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="configure-controls"><td>Configure the SCS to enforce intent <a href="#configure-controls">🔗</a><td>

The organization MUST configure access controls to restrict sensitive operations
on the Source Repository. These controls MUST be implemented using the
SCS-provided [Identity Management capability](#identity-management).

> For example, an organization may configure the SCS to assign users to a
`maintainers` role and only allow users in `maintainers` to make updates to
`main`.

The SCS MUST be configured to produce a reliable [Change History](#history)
for all consumable Source Revisions. If your SCS provides this capability by
design, no additional controls are needed.

If the SCS supports "tags", the SCS MUST be configured to prevent them from
being moved or deleted.

> support change management), the SCS MUST be configured to prevent them from
> being moved or deleted.

Author: ```suggestion
```

An organization MUST document the Safe Expunging Process and describe how requests and actions are tracked and SHOULD log the fact that content was removed.
Different organizations and tech stacks may have different approaches to the problem.

SCSs SHOULD have technical mechanisms in place which require an Administrator plus at least one additional 'trusted person' to trigger any expunging (removals) made under this process.

The application of the safe expunging process and the resulting logs MAY be private to both prevent calling attention to potentially sensitive data (e.g. PII) or to comply with local laws
and regulations which may require the change to be kept private to the extent possible.
Organizations SHOULD prefer to make logs public if possible.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

> <tr id="intent"><td>Declare which revisions are consumable <a href="#intent">🔗</a><td>

Reviewer: I bet you can take the "The organization MUST specify what technical controls consumers can expect" bit from above and merge in here too (or have another row below it).

logs public if possible.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

> <tr id="intent"><td>Declare which revisions are consumable and their technical controls<a href="#intent">🔗</a><td>

Author: We could avoid it here in particular by focusing on the activity:

```suggestion
<tr id="intent"><td>Declare where to find consumable revisions and their technical controls<a href="#intent">🔗</a><td>
```

> Consumers can think "anytime I use this named reference I should expect the corresponding source revisions to have evidence of those claims"

Agree, but it's also possible to have multiple consumable revisions reachable from a branch. There's no requirement that _only_ the tip is legal.
EG, if a release branch moves (logically moving from version 1.0 to 1.1), both commits are consumable and probably had the same technical controls.

> <tr id="intent"><td>Declare which revisions are consumable and their technical controls<a href="#intent">🔗</a><td>

Reviewer: Perhaps we can resolve this by providing more explanation either here or elsewhere.  I'll need to think about it a bit more.

On the terminology point, I've been perhaps a bit too liberal (or not thinking about git internals) when I use the langauge "consume a revision **from** B". What I mean is "consume a revision that **was pointed to by** B". I guess I'm using the branch name as a name for the ["cohesive line of development"](https://slsa.dev/spec/draft/source-requirements#:~:text=cohesive%20line%20of%20development) and not just for whatever is currently being pointed to.

There should be provenance or VSA for the revision that will indicate which named references pointed to it so consumers will have a way of determining where the thing came from.

With that my assumptions are as follows:

1. Organizations will set expectations within the context of a branch or tag.  "Things on branch A [meaning things that A has pointed to] will meet properties X, Y, Z".  This is where the expectations originate.
2. These expectations _transfer_ to the pointed to revisions.  Organizations are unlikely to explicitly set expectations for individual revisions.  E.g. they won't say "You should expect revision M to have properties X, Y" because that wouldn't be especially valuable, you can just say what properties it _does_ have (via the VSA).
3. The SCS will only issue a 'passing' VSA for a revision tied to a named reference if the revision met the expectations of that named reference.
4. Users should validate the VSA before consuming the revision.

In practice this means that when consumers set up their consumption of revisions from a source repo they'll somehow establish their baseline expectations (based on '1'), their tooling will then fetch revisions (somehow), and then check that their baseline expectations are met by the revision.

Now perhaps what you're getting at is "why do branches and tags have to enter into this at all, can't an organization say 'any revision that has properties X, Y, Z should be considered consumable, regardless of what named reference it came from'?".  Is that right?

If so, I think it might have continuity problems, but maybe it could work?

In either case, I'm thinking that it would help clarify the spec if we explained a bit more what we mean by expectations, and where they get set.  That might be something we need to discuss prior to the requirements themselves?  Maybe with the other definitions?

The organization MUST specify which Source Revisions are intended for use and
how to find them.

> For example, if an organization has branches `main` and `experimental` and it
intends for Source Revisions on `main` to be used, then it MUST document that
revisions on `main` can be consumed. From that point forward, revisions on
`main` will be considered consumable while revisions solely on `experimental`
will not.

The organization MUST specify what technical controls consumers can expect to be
enforced on consumable Source Revisions and it MUST document the meaning of
those controls.

> For example, if an organization implements a technical control via a custom
tool (such as required GitHub Actions workflow), it must indicate the name of
this tool, what it accomplishes, and how to find its evidence in the provenance
attestation.

> For another example, if the organization intends to claim that all consumable
Source Revisions on the `main` branch were unit tested prior to acceptance, this

> MUST be explicitly configured in the SCS, not left to a purely social contract.

Author: > you can't implement in a technical control it won't be encoded in the provenance or VSA.

I've never seen anyone try to do that one formally, but I have seen claims like "all members of this team are X, and only members of that team contributed to the code". That kind of contribution policy can be verified and attached to the provenance. 

It does seem reasonable that if you want to claim in a VSA, you have to ("must") provide mechanical evidence for it somehow.

At Source Levels 1 and 2 the SCS MAY issue these attestations based on its
understanding of the underlying system (e.g. based on design docs, security
reviews, etc...), but at Level 3+ the SCS MUST use
the SCS-issued [source provenance](#source-provenance) when issuing
the VSAs.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="history"><td>History <a href="#history">🔗</a><td>

The SCS MUST record the sequence of all Source Revisions ever referenced by a
branch.
This MUST include metadata capturing when each change occurred and the actor who
made it.

The SCS MUST prevent tampering with these records on protected branches.

> For example, in systems like GitHub or GitLab, this can be accomplished by
enabling branch protection rules that prevent force pushes and branch deletions.

If revisions have their own ancestries in your VCS, the SCS MUST ensure that all
new revisions added to a branch are descendants of the previous revisions.

> For example, if `main` currently points to revision `a`, it may only be

> moved to a new revision, `b`, if `b` has `a` somewhere in its revision ancestry.

Reviewer: Is this strictly needed?  Source Revisions already need to include their parent revision https://slsa.dev/spec/draft/source-requirements#:~:text=author%2C%20timestamp%2C%20and-,parent%20revision,-(s).%20Note%3A%20Path.

Reviewer: IDK, maybe I'm daft but I think this is covered by 

"The SCS MUST record the sequence of all Source Revisions ever referenced by a
branch."

If they force push 'legal' commits then that record of the sequence of Source Revisions is gone?

If it is necessary, maybe it can be said more plainly?

Author: There are two parts for the history reqirement:
1. reflog: the SCS must keep track of the sequence of revisions ever-pointed-to by a ref.
2. lineage: each new revision on a ref must be a descendent of the previous revision in the reflog (or null).

If your reflog currently has the ordered list [null,a,b,c], you may not update it to be [null,a,b,c,b], because b is not a descendent of c.
If you want to "go back" to the tree id captured by b, you must introduce a new "revert" commit d which descends from c. 

This is the core concept of the "no force pushes" rule.

Reviewer: Perhaps this can be resolved by adding a requirement that the history of a branch must be linear?  That seems less wonky/git specific.

Reviewer: Hmm, going back to the original point, I'm thinking the language "The SCS MUST record the sequence of all Source Revisions ever referenced by a
branch." provides enough justification for blocking force push?  Doesn't force push get rid of that sequence?

My main motivation here is to try to keep the language as simple as possible.

"If revisions have their own ancestries in your VCS, the SCS MUST ensure that all..." would also seem to fall into a category of being covered well enough?

If not, what additional problem (beyond keeping the history of all the revisions) is this solving?

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="branches"><td>Protected Branches <a href="#branches">🔗</a><td>

The SCS MUST provide a mechanism for organizations to indicate which branches
should be protected by technical controls.

> For example, the organization may instruct the SCS to protect `main` and
`refs/heads/releases/*`, but not `refs/heads/experimental/*` using branch
protection rules (e.g. [GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/configuring-branches-and-merges-in-your-repository/managing-rulesets/about-rulesets),
[GitLab](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/repository/branches/protected.html))
or via the application and verification of [gittuf](https://github.com/gittuf/gittuf)
policies.

> <td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<td><td><td>✓<td>✓
```

Reviewer: This is the way orgs signal which branches are consumable, no?  That's how I'd been thinking about it.

If it's just about communicating which branches meet L2 requirements then the VSA alone can do that and we don't need anything special at L2.

Author: As I think about it, I think this makes sense. 
The main change for L3 is on the org side, "declaration of intent."
What tooling changes would be needed just for L3? Probably none, if we already have to generate source provenance for those controls at L2, and provenance requires knowledge of branches or tags I think.

Reviewer: > Good question. As a starting point, wouldn't these have to be L2 in order to let the Org configure them?

Some SCSs make this the default. No configuration necessary.

> What tooling changes would be needed just for L3? Probably none, if we already have to generate source provenance for those controls at L2, and provenance requires knowledge of branches or tags I think.

Some SCSs don't have the ability to let orgs configure arbitrary controls.  If we move that to L2 then those systems can only achieve L1.

At Source Levels 1 and 2 the SCS MAY issue these attestations based on its
understanding of the underlying system (e.g. based on design docs, security
reviews, etc.), but at Level 3+ the SCS MUST use
the SCS-issued [source provenance](#source-provenance) when issuing
the VSAs.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="history"><td>History <a href="#history">🔗</a><td>

> There are two key aspects to change history:

Author: 🔢 counting.

continuously from one revision to another. If a control is disabled for the
introduction of a new revision and then re-enabled it is difficult to reason
about the effectiveness of the control. 'Continuity' is the concept of ensuring
technical controls are enforced continuously, leading to a higher degree of
trust in the revisions produced after their introduction.

On [protected branches](#branches), continuity for controls MUST be established
and tracked from a specific revision forward through each new revision created.
If there is a lapse in continuity for a specific control, continuity of that
control MUST be re-established from a new revision.

Continuity exceptions are allowed via the [safe expunging process](#safe-expunging-process).

> For example, the main branch currently points to revision `a` and a new
technical control `t` is configured.
The next revision on the `main` branch, `b` will be the first revision that can
claim to have been protected by `t` and `b` is the first revision in the
"continuity" of `t`.
If in the future, `t` is disabled, any revisions added to `main` while `t` is
disabled cannot claim to have been protected by `t` and the "continuity" of `t`

> will be reset.

Author: A draft of a continuity example, cc @arewm 

maybe defining what `t` is would make it more clear? IE, "no force pushes". If you let that one lapse for a single force push, you have lost a LOT of context on the branch

Author: > Will consumers need to update their policy once t' comes into play?
Probably yes? There are some rules where the configuration could be monotonically more strict, but I suspect most of the change would be complex like "we used to use workflow x@123 for this, but now we use y@456"

Author: > any individual commit could be protected by t in theory, but that is not sufficient for ensuring organizational intent is met from a given revision/point in time. Instead, organizations state their intent based on the protections and then acknowledge how long they have been.

Oo, I like this much better. Sort of like "continuity reflects an organization's ongoing committment to a control."
Or "it is the number of revisons in a row (on the reflog only?) where a control was enforced."

While I agree it's important to quantify how committed an org is to a control, I'm not sure how to use that data, it's pretty gameable. Would I write a policy like, i only care about controls that have been in place for 100 commits?

At Source Levels 1 and 2 the SCS MAY issue these attestations based on its
understanding of the underlying system (e.g. based on design docs, security
reviews, etc...), but at Level 3+ the SCS MUST use
the SCS-issued [source provenance](#source-provenance) when issuing
the VSAs.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="history"><td>History <a href="#history">🔗</a><td>

The SCS MUST record the sequence of all Source Revisions ever referenced by a
branch.
This MUST include metadata capturing when each change occurred and the actor who
made it.

The SCS MUST prevent tampering with these records on protected branches.

> For example, in systems like GitHub or GitLab, this can be accomplished by
enabling branch protection rules that prevent force pushes and branch deletions.

> If revisions have their own ancestries in your VCS, the SCS MUST ensure that all
> new revisions added to a branch are descendants of the previous revisions.

Author: ```suggestion
If revisions have their own ancestries in the VCS, the SCS MUST ensure that all
new revisions added to a branch are descendants of the previous revision of the branch.
```

the VSAs.

<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

<tr id="history"><td>History <a href="#history">🔗</a><td>

If a Named Reference is updated, the SCS MUST record the actor making the
change, the new Source Revision ID and the timestamp of the change.

> The SCS MUST prevent tampering with these records.

Author: > What does it mean for an SCS to keep track of the sequence of revisions ever pointed to by a ref? 

this would be the server's reflog (GitHub draws some of that data as the branches view).

> If you create a new branch off of a current one, would the entire commit history be included in the reflog or would it start fresh from that commit?

The revision history would be the same, but I guess the branch history would be new? We've said elsewhere there would be no continutiy or provenance attestations for old commits if you import a repo from another server (ie, transferring from Azure Repos to GitHub), more or less because you don't have to trust what the other server did, you just attest to what you've seen.

statement of fact from the perspective of the SCS. The SCS MUST document the
format and intent of all Source Provenance attestations it produces.

Source Provenance MUST be created contemporaneously with the branch being
updated such that they provide a credible, auditable, record of changes.

If a consumer is authorized to access a revision, they MUST be able to access the
corresponding Source Provenance documents for that revision.

> 

Author: consolidated this into the source provenance part -- it seems mostly to be a provenance generation control

It is possible that an SCS can make no claims about a particular revision.

> For example, this would happen if the revision was created on another SCS,
on a unprotected branch (such as a `topic` branch), or if the revision was not
the result of the expected change management process.

The SCS MUST

-   Allow organizations to provide
   [organization-specified properties](#additional-properties) to be included in the
   [Source VSA](#source-verification-summary-attestation) when the corresponding controls are
   enforced.
-   Allow organizations to distribute additional attestations related to their
   technical controls to consumers authorized to access the corresponding Source
   Revision.
-   Prevent organization-specified properties from beginning with any value
   other than `ORG_SOURCE_` unless the SCS endorses the veracity of the
   corresponding claims.

> <td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<td><td><td>✓<td>✓
```

Source Provenance MUST be created contemporaneously with the branch being
updated such that they provide a credible, auditable, record of changes.

If a consumer is authorized to access a revision, they MUST be able to access the
corresponding Source Provenance documents for that revision.

It is possible that an SCS can make no claims about a particular revision.

> For example, this would happen if the revision was created on another SCS,
on an unprotected branch (such as a `topic` branch), or if the revision was not
the result of the expected change management process.

The SCS MUST

-   Allow organizations to provide
   [organization-specified properties](#additional-properties) to be included in the
   [Source VSA](#source-verification-summary-attestation) when the corresponding controls are
   enforced.
-   Allow organizations to distribute additional attestations related to their
   technical controls to consumers authorized to access the corresponding Source
   Revision.
-   Prevent organization-specified properties from beginning with any value
   other than `ORG_SOURCE_` unless the SCS endorses the veracity of the

>    corresponding claims.

Reviewer: Suggestion: these are all about the _additional_ technical controls in "Protected Named References". Can we just move this set of requirements there?

Reviewer: SGTM!

   enforced.
-   Allow organizations to distribute additional attestations related to their
   technical controls to consumers authorized to access the corresponding Source
   Revision.
-   Prevent organization-specified properties from beginning with any value
   other than `ORG_SOURCE_` unless the SCS endorses the veracity of the
   corresponding claims.

<td><td>✓<td>✓<td>✓
<tr id="branches"><td>Protected Branches <a href="#branches">🔗</a><td>

The SCS MUST provide any technical controls needed to enforce the organization's
intent for the repo.

The SCS MUST provide a mechanism for organizations to indicate which branches
should be protected by technical controls.

> For example, the organization may instruct the SCS to protect `main` and
`refs/heads/releases/*`, but not `refs/heads/experimental/*` using branch
protection rules (e.g. [GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/configuring-branches-and-merges-in-your-repository/managing-rulesets/about-rulesets),
[GitLab](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/repository/branches/protected.html))
or via the application and verification of [gittuf](https://github.com/gittuf/gittuf)

> policies.

Author: they need to be _configured_ to be unmovable. I don't think there are any SCSs that would have them actually _be_ unmovable. I think we can get away by calling it a control required to achieve the history requirement.

> policies.

Reviewer: The SLSA Source Tool implementation actually can prevent them from being moved even by admins unless they change their policy, which resets the clock at which they've had the control enabled, making the bypass visible.

_That_ SCS includes GitHub but goes beyond what it provides by adding additional controls on top.

Maybe I'm being pedantic or missing something though.

I really do like the idea of considering the tag protection as a part of preserving history though.

I'm coming around to combining them though. I think this would actually part of the declaring intent that we discussed for L3 at the last meeting [link](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/issues/1459#:~:text=L3%20would%20be%20about%20organizational%20intent%20(%22is%20this%20branch%20meant%20for%20consumption%3F%22).

The existing protecte branches/tags control served to both preserve history and declare intent.  History is now preserved elsewhere, but we could combine them here to say that the SCS must enable orgs to declare which branches and tags are meant for consumption and what controls they have in place (e.g. IMMUTABLE_REFERENCE, TESTED, HISTORY)?
